[THEME MUSIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As exciting as the new
advances in the longevity space
are, we're not at a point yet
of having a magic pill that will
miraculously make us
healthy and young again.
Therefore, we should probably
not forget about the basics.
>>CHRIS BUMSTEAD: My
name is Chris Bumsted.
And I am a four time
Mr. Olympia bodybuilder.
I compete in the classic
physique division.
So I've been competing in
bodybuilding for 10 years
now as a professional
bodybuilder for six years.
And it's a full-time job.
It's treating food the way
you eat like a full-time job,
training like a full-time
job, and sleep and recovery
like a full-time job.
And over time, I also
began to incorporate
caring about my health rather
than just the physical image
of my physique.
And that's when I
really started to get
into the benefits
of longevity hacking
and the beauty of focusing on
your health rather than just
an image.
So I absolutely believe
exercise, especially lifting
weights and building
muscle, helps
in the longevity of
your health as a human
and I think more so than
just living a long time
but actually being
healthy for a long time
and being able to
function in the world
the way you want to so you're
not stuck in a hospital bed
or stuck at home in bed
or something like that.
But the more muscle
you have, the stronger
your body is, the more you can
fight off disease and illness,
the less likely you are
to fall, the more likely
you are when you fall to
be able to recover quicker
because one of the earliest
signs of deaths in someone
is when they fall.
They break a hip or a leg
or something like that.
Once you're over
the age of like 70,
it's really hard to
recover from that.
And the more muscle you
have, the more likely
you are to catch
yourself not from fall.
And if you do, also to
recover or not hurt yourself.
So I think it is so
important to exercise
throughout your entire life.
Eat a high protein
diet, exercise hard,
put weight bearing
loads so that you're
able to maintain
that muscle mass.
And of course, cardiovascular
health through your endurance
is also very important
to keep your heart
working overtime,
keep your heart strong
and pumping like it needs to.
>>TONY ROBBINS:
Building muscle mass--
also direct relationship--
I put in the books, in Life
Force, several studies that show
it directly relates to cancer.
Your muscle mass plays a bigger
role than you have any idea.
It's not about
just looking good.
It's about strength.
And it's about vitality.
And it's about your metabolism.
And it's something
that every person has
got to take care of themselves.
Work out three times a week.
Make a commitment.
And don't miss it.
Have it a certain
day, a certain time.
It's a schedule,
like anything else.
And once it becomes a
habit, it becomes easy.
And then if you don't
do it, you crave it.
>>CHRIS MIRABILE: Exercise
is important on both
the microscopic and
on the macro level.
On the microscopic level, it
is stressing your mitochondria,
the power plants of your cells.
And it's making more powerful,
resilient mitochondria.
One of the 12
hallmarks of aging is
the aging of your mitochondria.
And then on the more
physiological level,
it is leading to better
circulation, better heart
health, even neurogenesis--
so new neurons
being formed from exercise.
>>BUMSTEAD: One thing
you learn in bodybuilding
is that you can't
out diet no training.
And you can't out
train bad dieting.
They don't really
counteract each other.
And you could eat as
healthy as possible.
Or you could eat nothing.
You could fast.
You could do all these things.
And you really need to push
your body to new limits
to continue to grow and
be as strong as possible.
And no one really gets too old
and wishes they had less muscle
or wishes they were weaker.
Usually wish you were feeling
a little bit stronger,
a little bit more robust.
And that's something that only
really comes from exercise.
>>MARK CUBAN: I
actually work out
more now than I did 10
years ago or 15 years ago
because my body needs it more.
Usually, it's anywhere
from 45 to 90 minutes plus
trying to walk places.
When we're on the
set of Shark Tank,
everybody else is
taking the carts.
The set is 0.35 miles away.
And I'm walking back and forth.
So I'm walking two miles a day
while we're shooting Shark Tank.
If I never had to look in the
mirror, I'd think I was 35.
>>TONY HORTON: Especially as
you get into your 30s, 40s, 50s,
60s, and beyond, if you're
not moving physically,
then you become limited.
Your range of motion decreases.
Your strength decreases.
Your flexibility decreases.
And then, of course,
a lot of the things
that you want to try and
do are inevitably too hard.
And so then your world gets
smaller and smaller and smaller.
That's going to keep
you young and youthful.
The things that I can
physically do at 60, almost 64,
I couldn't do in my
teens, 20s, or 30s.
But I can do it now.
So I mean, how long
am I going to live?
I don't know.
I mean, I'd like to
live into my 90s.
Who knows, maybe beyond that.
It's not really so
much about longevity.
It's about quality of life where
I am right here and right now.
But the end result is, I
mean, here I am in my 60s,
feeling better than ever.
>>NIR BARZILAI: The first
thing is I exercise.
And I actually
exercise every day.
Exercise at any age is maybe
the most important intervention.
Moving-- OK, you have
to move all the time.
It has a huge effect
on the healthspan.
>>ROBBINS: Listen, you
don't move, you don't live.
I can tell you all the wonderful
things you can do biochemically
for your body.
But there's no replacement
still for exercise and movement.
I think it's not
just about medicine.
It's about us doing our part.
But today, most people
don't do their part.
>>MORGAN LAVINE: I
always say, if they
could bottle the
effects of exercise,
it would be the hottest kind of
therapeutic and aging research.
>>BRAD STANFIELD:
I could get all
of my patients to be exercising
at least half an hour a day.
I think I'd see half the
patients in the clinic
because most of them wouldn't
need to come to see me.
>>STEVE AOKI: When I think
about quality of life,
the baseline has to
start with energy.
Once you have abundant amount
of energy, then you live life.
>>WILL AHMED: If you're just
getting started on your health
and fitness journey or
you're a weekend warrior
but now you want to
really understand
what it takes for that longer
longevity, the first thing to do
is to start measuring some
key metrics about your body,
understanding your sleep, your
resting heart rate, your heart
rate variability, your VO2 max,
measuring these things over time
and seeing what about
your lifestyle today
is changing them, and
then starting to implement
very specific changes.
Could be to exercise.
It could be to
your sleep routine.
Could be to your diet.
And all of a sudden
starting to see improvement
in these metrics.
That will be
incredibly motivating
and give you the feedback
that you need to improve.
>> What if one day we could
press a button and print a new
heart or a new liver from
our own live cultured cells?
That would be pretty
amazing, right?
And that reality might actually
be closer than we think.
>>PETER DIAMANDIS: So today, if
you need a heart, liver, lung,
kidney transplant, you're
waiting for someone to die
and then hoping that you're
on the transplant list.
But it's not going to
be that way for long.
What we're seeing
is incredible work.
Like, what if you could
engineer the surface antigens
so that you can take a
pig heart or a pig kidney
and transplant it to a human
and have it not be rejected?
It works the same.
And so the goal here-- and
it's happening right now.
It's not perfected yet
but, inside this decade,
we will see it, where if
you're on a transplant list,
you don't have to wait
for someone to perish.
There are going to be
organs made available to you
that can keep you alive
for years, maybe decades.
Another technology--
this comes from the work
of Dr. Dean Kamen, the Advanced
Regenerative Manufacturing
Institute.
He's built technology that can
take a pluripotent stem cell,
take one of your
skin cells, turn it
into what's called an induced
pluripotent stem cell,
put it in one end
of the machine.
The machine replicates that
stem cell billions of fold
and then has those stem
cells differentiate
in the proper fashion and
then manufactures an organ.
Imagine being able to
go from a skin biopsy
to a new heart for yourself
or kidney or liver or lung.
It's an extraordinary time.
>> How many times have you woken
up refreshed after sleeping
for 8 to 10 hours or felt like a
zombie after a sleepless night?
This contrast tells us how
important sleep is to our bodies
and that perhaps it can
even affect our longevity.
>>BRYAN JOHNSON: The
longevity therapies
I'm most excited about are
sleep, diet, and exercise.
They're the most uninteresting
and basic components
that no one wants to hear
about because everybody wants
to hear about the magic drug.
But they're the three
things nobody's doing.
>>ROBERT GOLDMAN:
I believe sleep is
very important for good health.
Because during sleep, you
release growth hormone.
And you have to give the
body a chance to reanimate.
There's a lot of hormonal and
other mechanisms of restoration
that occur during sleep.
>>AHMED: Slow wave
sleep and REM sleep
are really the two most
important periods of sleep.
Slow wave sleep is more
focused on repairing
your muscles and your body.
And REM sleep is getting your
mind to repair cognitively.
It's also when you're dreaming.
So people who say they
can't remember their dreams
or they don't think they
dream, they're probably
not getting enough REM sleep.
But both these periods of
sleep are incredibly important.
>>AOKI: But I've fucked my
sleep off for so many years.
My REM is just pretty poor.
So I'm trying to figure
that out the best
I can so that my energy
is as full as possible
from renewable source.
>>TONY HAWK: People will say
like, oh, we're having dinner.
It starts at 8:00.
Like 8:00?
Are you kidding me?
We are so heading upstairs at
8:00 to go to bed because I
lived a life where I
was always exhausted.
And it's like you're burning
the candle at both ends.
And it catches up to you.
And at some point, you can
pay the price in a heavy way,
especially if you're
doing what I do.
>>ROBBINS: I used to say,
I'll sleep when I die.
I used to sleep five hours,
five and a half hours
to be my max, and sometimes
four, which is not good.
You can't sustain that.
And I think everybody has
variance in their capacity.
But when I was doing
Life Force, of course,
I had to do the
homework on sleep.
And I interviewed some of the
top sleep experts in the world.
And one of them
said to me, Tony,
I'll prove to you,
beyond a shadow
of a doubt, the value
of more hours of sleep.
And I said, OK, tell me.
He goes, we did a study
on 1.6 billion people.
I said, that's total BS.
No one did a study of
1.6 billion people.
He said, yes, we did.
All the countries where people
have daylight savings time.
And he said, you'll find
this in every single country.
When we spring forward and you
lose an hour, the next day,
in the next 24 hours, there's a
24% increase in heart attacks.
And he went through
all their statistics--
car accidents, everything.
What's crazy is when
we fall back and get
one hour extra in the fall,
the exact number, 23%,
is where the 1% change
goes the other way,
meaning less heart attacks.
So if one hour of sleep can do
that, I started saying, hmm.
So now, I work to get six.
>>BUMSTEAD: Because sleep
is such an important thing
for longevity.
I think if you're trying to
live a long, healthy lifestyle,
stress reduction
and sleep are some
of the two most important and
easy things that you can apply.
Within that, obviously, there's
different cues and things
that help.
Personally, I like to
just make sure stress
is as low as possible when
I get close to bedtime.
So I stay away from stuff
like social media, blue light,
my phone, anything like that.
I just try and
really decompress,
whether it's through meditation
or just spending time
with my dog and my fiancée.
I wear these blue
light blocking glasses,
which prevent blue light
from coming in your eyes.
And you can feel
your brain relax
as you put those on
because you're preventing
any harsh lights
coming into your body
because, naturally,
humans were meant
to go sleep when the sun came
down and when it came back up.
And now, with artificial
light and everything,
we've kind of thrown off
our circadian rhythm.
>>JOHNSON: I'm in the 99.4
percentile of quality sleepers.
Now, if we just got good
sleep, the world may change.
But oftentimes, we're gravitated
towards this supplement
or that supplement or this
magic pill or that magic pill.
But mastering the basic thing
of sleep is just beyond reach.
And if we can just
take the simplest thing
and get that right
in our lives--
we all know that.
The difference between hope and
despair is a good night's sleep.
>>NICO HELLING:
Studies in Germany
have shown that more than
80% of the population
suffers from chronic
sleep deprivation.
Sleep is extremely important
for the body to recover.
>>AHMED: It's now proven that
good sleep increases longevity.
A study just as
recently as 2023 showed
that getting quality sleep
increases lifespan for men
by just over four years and
for women by over two years.
>>MIRABILE: It's been found that
if people have inadequate sleep,
in the short term, it can
cause metabolic disturbances--
for example, higher
blood glucose
levels after as little as two
days of interrupted sleep.
>>SANDRA KAUFMANN: So the
connection between sleep
and aging is absolutely key.
As a consequence
of not sleeping,
you don't give yourself
the time to make proteins
that are constructed at night.
Up to 30% of proteins are in
fact constructed at night.
So you're limiting your
repair capacity in essence.
And it's been demonstrated that
people that don't sleep well
or that work night shifts have
a higher propensity for cancer.
>>LAVINE: So sleep
is something that
actually gets ignored probably
a lot more than it should.
And it's not just
sleep quantity.
It's not just the number of
hours that people are sleeping.
But it's also the
quality of that sleep.
So do you have
interrupted sleep?
Or can you actually have
a full kind of night sleep
without interruption.
>>AHMED: Well, studies
show that inadequate sleep
and particularly
inadequate quality sleep,
which is getting this
restorative sleep,
is correlated with virtually all
these different disease states
and forms of lack of
cognitive function.
So getting quality sleep
is about as foundational
as there is to living a
happy and performative life.
>>DIAMANDIS: If we could have
done with less sleep, frankly,
evolution would have
gotten rid of it.
>>WIM HOF: That's why we are
always so active and thinking
and you cannot
stop and [GROANS].
And when we want to go
sleep, we have no peace.
It's because of the cortisol.
You take a cold shower.
You will sleep like a baby.
>>JOHNSON: So here would
be my tips for sleep.
One, if you can, sleep
in a room by yourself.
I'm fortunate that I can.
Not everyone can.
Do I think sleeping with our
partners is potentially dated?
Maybe.
I mean, if we actually look
at all of our habits society,
we live the traditions
of dead people.
We do so much of what's been
done for hundreds of years.
And little of it is questioned.
But when you're
trying to synchronize
two people in one room--
bedtimes, wake up
times, disturbances--
it's a difficult
thing to manage.
Not everybody has the luxury
of having their own sleep area.
But where it's possible, I
strongly suggest people do it.
Number two, black out your room.
No light.
Number three is no alcohol.
It destroys your sleep.
Four is be mindful of
how close you eat to bed.
I currently fast for about
10 hours, which is a lot.
But try to eat.
Give some time separation
from your last meal
to when you go to sleep.
And then five is I do a
temperature-controlled room
or mattress.
Controlling temperature for
sleep is really helpful.
And then finally, go to sleep
at the same time every day
no matter what.
>>MIRABILE: So I have connected
light bulbs that change
color an hour before bedtime.
And they turn red.
So it looks a little bit
like the red light district.
But it actually helps to
produce melatonin in my body.
And so when I do put my
head down on the pillow,
I fall asleep quickly.
I wear earplugs so
that no outside noise
or family members that might be
moving around will disturb me.
And then I also have a
sleep mask on, again,
so that no light comes
in contact with my retina
even with my eyes closed.
>>AHMED: Now, we're
at this amazing era
in the history of technology.
We're in a very small,
tiny form factor.
You can actually continuously
measure your sleep
and understand what are all
the behaviors that you're doing
to maximize restorative sleep.
>> According to experts, it
seems like a lot of diseases are
related to inflammation.
So what is inflammation?
And how does it affect aging?
>>HOF: Inflammation
is a product,
a consequence of our immune
system trying to find
an answer for intruders.
It doesn't know where it is.
And then the body becomes
in the alarm condition.
And that alarm condition
is inflammation.
So that affects
the immune cells.
>>KAUFMANN: Because your immune
system, when you are younger,
does a very good job of
protecting you from the evils
of the world--
pathogens, et cetera.
As you get older, it
sort of turns on you.
And you become more
inflamed and less
able to fight off infection.
And inflammation is just
absolutely horrid on the body.
It releases more free radicals.
It creates DNA damage.
And so one of the main
tenets of blocking aging
is to decrease the
inflammatory process.
>>REASON: So your
innate immune system
is just running
around constantly
in your later life
saying, oh God,
this place is falling apart.
And that's a big problem.
And turning that
off is something
which people that
people are only really
just starting to get a grip on.
Which of these
levers do we maybe
think we can turn to stop
it reacting in this way?
>>STANFIELD: We're going to
be causing things like heart
disease, cancer, and diabetes.
So we want to try and
minimize inflammation as much
as possible so that we can
age better and, again, weather
those attacks in the
future a little bit better.
>>MOMCHILO VUYISICH:
So it can, for example,
cause leaky gut and leaky gums
and leaky blood brain barrier.
It can actually attack
its own organs, which
is what we call
autoimmune diseases,
such as rheumatoid arthritis.
It can cause inflammation,
such as inflammatory bowel
disease, and then all these
neurodegenerative diseases.
So all of those, even
metabolic disease and obesity,
are very likely caused
by inflammation.
>>NAVEEN JAIN: What is the
purpose of inflammation?
Why do we even have
this inflammation?
Well, guess what?
If we didn't have inflammation,
we would die of wounds.
So inflammation is
really good when
it is needed for a short term.
So you get wounded,
it becomes red.
That's inflammation, to stop
the bacteria from actually
getting inside the body.
But a chronic
inflammation that we
are having due to our lifestyle,
the modern lifestyle, that
is what's causing us to age.
What causes those inflammation?
Constant stress.
Our work environment
is stressful.
And a lot of people will tell
you their home environment
is stressful.
So it's work that
causes us to stress.
And you go home.
And your spouse
causes to stress.
And then you suddenly
have stress all the time.
That causes inflammation.
And I think also the
nutrition that we
are providing our body are in
fact getting less and less.
People used to live on a farm.
They used to eat the food
that has a lot of fiber.
Now, we're eating all
the processed food.
And that is causing our body
not to have the nutrition.
Not only that, we now growing
the food that are full
of pesticides, full
of insecticides,
full of antibiotics in the meat.
And that's causing us
now the whole ecosystem
inside our body to be destroyed.
>>KAUFMANN: So there are many
ways to fight inflammation.
A lot of people started
at the dietary level.
And they tend to consume
foods and agents that are
less inflammatory than others.
But once you are already
inflamed in your body,
there are many molecular
agents that do this.
By far, I think the
best one is curcumin.
>>LAVINE: Exercise seems to have
a big impact on inflammation.
So even though exercise
itself is a stressor,
it's what we call hormetic.
So it's this mild
stressor that can actually
have a beneficial
impact in the long run.
And one of those impacts is that
it seems to reduce inflammation.
Other things are
reducing stress.
So people who even experienced
these traumatic life events
or have continued chronic
stress due to potentially
socioeconomic situations tend to
have more inflammatory profiles.
>> A happy and healthy
mind yields a healthy body.
For millennia, people
have explored the role
that our mind plays
on our bodies.
But could a healthy mindset
also affect our longevity?
>>MIRABILE: As recently as
2007, scientists and researchers
did not believe that stress
could lead to chronic illnesses.
But since then, a lot of
research has come out.
And it's been found
that stress can
lead to things like
cardiovascular disease,
autoimmune disorders,
and even cancer.
The reason for this is
that, when we're stressed,
we're disrupting the
circadian cortisol rhythm.
And that is going to
lead to a downregulation
of the glucocorticoid receptors
in inflammatory cells.
>>JAIN: Our bodies
were never designed
to be constantly under stress.
And that's the
reason when you go
home, what is the thing
people say before you eat?
Let's do the blessing
or the prayer.
Why is that?
Because the idea was
to actually bring
your body from sympathetic
mode into parasympathetic mode.
That means get rid of
fight or flight response.
Be in the gratitude
so you actually
now reduce your
stress so your body
can start to digest the food.
>>KAUFMANN: What happens
is when you are stressed,
your body produces more
inflammatory cytokines.
You get increased cortisol
levels and a variety
of other hormonal levels.
And those things create
a calamitous situation
around your body.
>>JAIN: Stress causes your gut
microbiome to go out of balance.
And then when your
microbiome is out of balance,
they actually change your
mind because your gut-brain
axis constantly through
the vagus nerve-- they're
communicating.
So the idea is when the
ecosystem in your gut
is imbalanced, you get
mental health issues.
And it causes inflammation.
>>BUMSTEAD: We live a
very fast paced lifestyle
in this day and age.
We all want the next car, a
bigger house, a better job,
working all day, losing sleep.
Then we're on our
phone, on Instagram,
or on Facebook all night.
And we're constantly stimulated
by the stress in our body
that we don't even realize it.
And living in a
constant state of stress
is going to lead to
a state of disease.
So I truly think that being
able to retract yourself
from that, be in
the present moment,
slow yourself down sometimes,
be grateful for wherever you're
at in life even if it's not
exactly where you want to be,
and just having a more abundant,
positive attitude rather
than a negative,
fearful attitude
is something that is less
studied and less proven
but I think we're
truly starting to see
can lead to a much longer and
healthier, happier lifestyle.
>>PETR SRAMEK: Stress management
and mental health is very
important part of the longevity
approach because everything is
interconnected, because you
cannot improve your mental state
without improving your biology.
And you cannot improve enough
your biology without improving
your mental state.
>>ROBBINS: The study today
that was just published
in the Smithsonian, which is
an echo of a study on 500,000
people, said the reduction
of stress was the single most
important thing.
But stress is very different.
Is it eustress or distress?
Say you get excited.
That can be stressful
on your body.
Your adrenals fire off.
It can be stressful
on your body.
But if you're
enjoying yourself, it
has a radically different
biochemical effect
when it's distress and
you're really upset.
We need a certain amount
of stress to feel alive.
of stress to be healthy.
But it's the balance of stress.
And is that, again,
eustress or distress?
It's amazing someone's attitude
and mindset about stress
and how that changes the
biochemistry of person
experiences.
>>BUMSTEAD: I know a lot
of people anecdotally
in my own life, such as my
grandparents, who-- they smoked.
And they drank.
But they had the
least stressful life.
They came from a town of a
population of 5,000 people.
There was no competitive nature.
You weren't trying to
beat your neighbor.
There was a large
sense of community.
And they're both 95 years old
and still healthy right now
and not applying any
longevity tricks or anything
other than living
a stress-free life.
>>HAWK: Yeah, I think that
people need to find their zen.
I mean, it's not like
finding your sport
or what are you good at.
It's more like, what gives
you a feeling of peace?
And what gives you a
feeling of centered?
Once you do it and
you walk away and you
know that that re-energized you
and that you have a clear mind
and that you can now
solve problems that
were in your life,
whatever that thing is,
make sure you try to do
it on a regular basis.
>>AHMED: The most powerful
tool I've found in my life
for improving stress has
been learning to meditate.
This can be a practice for
as short as 5 or 10 minutes.
It could be as
long as 20 minutes.
But it really allows you
to sit with your thoughts
and just breathe.
And what you learn to
develop in this process
is this third-person
perspective on how
all these different things
that are going on in your mind
are really operating.
And it gives you the ability
to control these thoughts
and pass them through.
And what you find
when you actually
measure the state of
meditating is it can often
look a lot like quality sleep.
And it can often really
decrease your resting heart rate
and increase your
heart rate variability,
which are key signs that
your body is actually
in a performance state.
>>JOHN SALLEY: Managing stress--
the best way of
doing it is yoga.
And the reason I tell you
that, when you're doing yoga,
you have to listen
to your breath.
That means you can't
think about anything else.
>>BUMSTEAD: I would say
exercise definitely promotes
good mental health and
helps stress management.
There's a lot of
endorphins and hormones
that your body releases through
training hard and exercising
hard, a lot of oxytocin
and serotonin your body
just naturally releases.
You get a dopamine surge
from a heavy lifting
workout and all these things.
And it naturally will
decrease your cortisol levels.
And there's also
a fact that if you
go in with high cortisol
levels into the gym,
your body can use that cortisol
to push through pain thresholds
and train harder.
And in the end,
your cortisol levels
will actually be even lower.
>>DESIREE COX: It turns
out things like making art,
creativity, dance, movement,
exercise, mindset, joy--
those things have biological
objective measures.
>>MIRABILE: So I
make sure that I
minimize any toxic
relationships in my life.
Hopefully, I can eliminate them.
If not, I minimize my
time with those people.
And I maximize my time with
the positive people in my life.
And when it comes
to relationships,
that does not exclude animals.
So I have my dog, Mia,
who I'm in love with.
And I find that even just
stopping for a second
and giving her a hug or a kiss
really calms me down a lot.
And I can feel the endorphins
flowing through me when
I spend some time with her.
>>HELLING: So purpose
in life actually
describes why you get out
of bed in the morning, what
makes you tick.
It is the reason
behind your actions.
And it serves as a
navigation system
that guides you through life and
helps you to strive and achieve.
>>HOF: And during the day, when
you become nervous or anxiety
or stressed, just
do 10 or 20 breaths.
You keep it to one minute,
like [BREATHING SHARPLY].
Take that moment.
You stop the stress.
What happens in the body--
five times more blood will
be flushed into your heart
and into your brain.
Give it to your body.
Give it to your brain, the
seat of the mind, its power,
its life force coming in.
You want death
force or life force?